---
layout: post
title: SDoH Ontology
category:
- AD
- ontology
tag:
- SDoH
- Ontology
date: 2024-04-10 16:06 -0500
pin: false
---
<h1 id="page-heading" class="h2">Social Determinant of Health Ontology (SDoH)</h1>
<p>An ontology formally representing Social Determinants of Health factors and the interrelationship among them.</p>


<p><strong>Social Determinants of Health Ontology (SDoHO)</strong>  has been developed to comprehensively represent the concepts, hierarchies, and relations pertinent to SDoH factors. The standardization characteristics of ontology with 
the comprehensive representation of SDoH are intended to address the current challenge of heterogeneity. 
By ensuring semantic interoperability and data FAIRness, which means data is Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, 
and Reusable, our proposed ontology can be applicable to downstream applications, such as 
natural language processing (NLP), and further help with the clinical decision.</p>

<p>SDoHO is shaped for clinical medicine, public health, and biomedical informatics usages, 
    facilitating systematic SDoH knowledge representation, integration, and reasoning.</p>

<p>
    The creation and evaluation of the Social Determinants of Health Ontology (SDoHO)
</p>
<p>
    The process was shown in Figure 1. The ontology was manually constructed in Protégé 5.5.0 and 
    represented in the Web Ontology Language (OWL2), using data sources like official and institutional websites, 
    standardized medical vocabularies and ontologies, biomedical literature, and other resources like PhenX 
    toolkit (as listed in Table 1).  
<br>
<table>
  <caption align="left">
    Table 1 : SDoHO data sources and examples
  </caption>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th scope="col">Source Type</th>
      <th scope="col">Examples</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th scope="row">Official & institutional websites</th>
      <td>WHO,  <br>CDC,  <br>Healthy People 2020, <br>Healthy People 2030,<br>Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF), <br>Rural Health information Hub,  <br>Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society (HIMSS),  <br>NEJM Catalyst,  <br>National Academy of Medicine (NAM), <br>Robert Wood Johnson Foundation,  <br>and American Hospital Association (AHA)
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th scope="row">Standardized medical vocabularies & ontologies</th>
      <td>LOINC, SNOMED-CT, UMLS</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th scope="row">Biomedical literature</th>
      <td>[19,21–23]</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th scope="row">Other resources</th>
      <td>PhenX Toolkit</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
</p>
<p>The construction of SDoHO followed a top-down (knowledge-driven) approach, initially defining classes based on 
  data sources, and then a bottom-up (data-driven) approach for evaluation/validation and refinement. 
  Definitions were primarily aligned with those available in the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) 
  with the Concept Unique Identifier (CUI).</p>
<p>For evaluation, we performed three rounds of semantic evaluation, where the organization of the ontology 
  was judged by three human experts. The interevaluator agreement score was calculated along with the 
  rational agreement score. Any disagreements were addressed iteratively until a consensus was reached.</p>
<p>The coverage of the ontology was evaluated using real-world data from The Harris County 
  Psychiatric Center (HCPC) and the Mayo Clinic and Olmsted Medical Center (OMC), and against the NIH 
  All of Us (AoU) Research Program’s SDoH survey.</p>
<p>The future application of SDoHO includes leveraging Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks and aiding in 
  clinical decision support. The design and evaluation process of SDoHO ensures its interoperability, 
  applicability, and scalability in various healthcare settings.</p>
<p><strong>Results</strong></p>
<p>We constructed the SDoHO with 708 classes, 106 object properties, and 20 data properties, 
  with 1,561 logical axioms and 976 declaration axioms in the current version. 
  Three experts achieved 0.967 agreement in the semantic evaluation of the ontology. 
  A comparison between the coverage of the ontology and SDOH concepts 
  in 2 sets of clinical notes and a national survey instrument also showed satisfactory results.</p>
<p><strong>Discussion</strong></p>
<p>SDoHO could potentially play an essential role in providing a foundation for a comprehensive 
  understanding of the associations between SDoH and health outcomes and paving the way for health 
  equity across populations.
</p>
<p><strong>Conclusion</strong></p>
<p>SDoHO has well-designed hierarchies, practical objective properties, and versatile functionalities, 
  and the comprehensive semantic and coverage evaluation achieved promising performance compared to 
  the existing ontologies relevant to SDoH.
</p>
<p>To better understand the mechanism of our ontology, click on the following link to 
  the full paper at: <a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocad096" target="_blank">https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocad096</a></p>
<p>To download, click on <a href="https://sbmi.uth.edu/bsdi/files/SDoHO_June2023.zip?language_id=1" target="_blank">Social Determinants of Health ontology (SDoHO)</a>.
</p>
<p>License: Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC 3.0) <a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/" target="_blank">https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/</a></p>
